This video is sponsored by CuriosityStream.
Get access to my streaming video service,
Nebula, when you sign up for CuriosityStream
using the link in the description.
Neil Armstrong described setting foot on the
Moon as one small step for a man, one giant
leap for mankind.
The National Space Society tells us that returning
to the Moon in a big way will accomplish 4
of 31 critical steps toward interplanetary
settlement.
So today we are continuing our look at becoming
an interplanetary species.
In parts one and two we took a look the first
steps, getting into orbit and colonizing Cislunar
space and our Lagrange Points, and today we’ll
be continuing our development as we look at
getting a base on the Moon and growing that
into a permanent facility to serve as our
stepping stone to other planets.
As before, we’ll be using the National Space
Society’s Roadmap to Space Settlement as
a loose guide, and I’ve linked the complete
document in the episode description.
The NSS considers part 3 to be a return to
the Moon, and the milestones for that will
be our focus today, though we’ll not hold
to it rigidly.
Also the Moon is a topic I try to hit about
once a year.
The principal episodes for that in order of
production are Moon Base Concepts, Industrializing
the Moon, Battle for the Moon, and Moon: Crater
Cities, and while we could easily do a dozen
episodes just on the Moon without denting
the material to discuss, some parts of today’s
topic we’ve looked at before in greater
depth in those episodes, so I’ll mention
and link those episodes as we go if you want
to dive in a bit deeper.
Now last time we talked about how we needed
the Moon as a resource source for developing
Cislunar Space and launching out beyond the
Earth-Moon region to places like Mars and
the Asteroid Belt, our main topics for episodes
4 and 5.
However, setting up the moon as some sort
of massive mine and manufactory is not something
we’ll do overnight and will have a lot of
intermediary steps.
Though I suppose one could argue we’ve already
mined the Moon, as collecting rock samples
was a primary mission for the Apollo Project.
This however is our first Milestone in Part
3, Milestone 18, Robotic Confirmation of Lunar
Resources.
Sending folks to the Moon is dangerous and
expensive.
It’s frankly amazing that so few lives have
been lost during Space Exploration and a testament
to the skill of engineers and mission planners
and operators, not to mention the sheer willpower
and courage of the astronauts.
We should not forget though that we lost the
Apollo 1 crew and nearly lost Apollo 13.
Given that we have only had 12 men on the
moon and lost 3 and nearly lost 3 more, that’s
not a ratio that encourages us to try more
manned missions, even with decades more technological
development, when a robot can do a given mission
easier, cheaper and safer and in some ways
better.
Before we can develop a permanent base on
the moon we need to know where the resources
are because unless launch costs drop massively
– as they might, see the Upward Bound series
for some of the options – then we can only
do such a base with either a very meager level
of resources or by sourcing a lot of them
on site, what is called “in-situ”, and
ISRU, In-Situ Resource Utilization.
Creating a rover that masses maybe a hundred
kilograms and has wheels, a remote, a battery,
some solar panels, a spectrometer and some
sample containers and some sort of excavating
apparatus is obviously well within our current
capabilities, and the Moon is close enough
for effectively real-time remote control of
the rover.
It would be relatively easy, compared to a
manned mission, to drop dozens or even hundreds
of such drones down on the Moon to collect
data and poke about for things like water
ice or mineral deposits.
Of course this is after we’ve refined and
validated our designs currently in development[a].
The low gravity of the Moon combined with
the talcum powder-like surface makes getting
enough traction for digging[b] difficult [c]and
the larger deposits we're looking for may
be below the surface and, beneath that top
layer of fine, dusty regolith, lunar soil
gets compacted and hard.
Another thing to consider is that if we intend
to set up large refining and processing centers
we need to find areas with large and varied
deposits.
Much of the ore extraction[d] and refining
processing is complemented by other materials
and byproducts.
Where one type of ore may yield materials
not necessarily profitable for export, but
useful for the processing of other ores or
useful in alloying or compounding into other
materials for local use or export.
The more varied the inputs, the more varied
and valuable your products.
But detailed, on the ground surveying of the
Moon isn’t just for finding a few good spots
for initial bases.
It is easy to forget that the moon is covered
in craters and at the bottoms of those craters
are meteorites.
Since the moon lacks all the biological, hydrological,
and geological processes of Earth that remove
craters, the semi-intact objects that impacted
there and caused them are basically still
there.
If you get good at surveying such craters
you would be able to spot which ones were
made by what kind of rocks and might find
some very valuable metals and minerals in
them.
For instance Carbonaceous chondrites, while
a relatively rare type of meteorite on Earth
as few make it through our atmosphere, don’t
contain many scarce or valuable elements on
Earth - but they’d be more common on the
Moon and their carbon and organic compounds,
containing volatiles, amino acids and rarer
light elements, would be prized.
But we won’t limit our exploration to just
the surface, lava tube skylights allow access
to vast sub-surface[e] spaces.
Lava tube spelunking probe designs are being
evaluated to explore these hidden interiors.
These designs consist of a rover which carries
the probe to the skylight and lowers[f] it
with a tether.
The probe then rapells down into the tube
where it then becomes a simpler rover.
The tether either stays attached to the probe,
acting as an umbilical for power and data,
or detaches and becomes an antenna for communicating
with the now self-powered probe.
However, we may want to go a step further,
as our technology has improved a lot in robotics
and does more every day.
Indeed, this recent health crisis has had
the silver lining of accelerating both our
capability and usage of remote work, and doubtless
we will be seeing major improvements in those
technologies in years to come as more and
more folks opt to work remotely and the tools
for doing so expand.
In a sense, at the timescales of space exploration
projects, robotic telepresence for exploring
the moon is not that far off.
Necessity is the mother of invention and that’s
a thing to remember for space exploration
too, there’s a good chance we will encounter
both problems we did not expect out there
and find solutions for those, and adaptations
of them useful for back at home, that we just
can not see right now.
But we are still in early days so our options
are limited.
However, not too limited.
For instance, it is just as easy, if not easier,
to make a rover that just has a scoop or dozer
blade on it as opposed to mineral surveying
gear, and have one shove regolith into a heap
or mound.
It is also not hard to include a solar kiln
that can bake oxygen out of regolith.
The Moon’s regolith is mostly oxygen by
mass, tied up in minerals with elements like
Silicon, Iron, Calcium, and Aluminum in that
order.
If you have a solar kiln extracting those
elements, then oxygen is actually a waste
product.
We do want those other elements too, as we
looked at in our last episode, getting megatons
of iron and aluminum off the Moon is critical
to developing Cislunar space as the fuel bill
for moving raw materials from the moon to
Low Earth Orbit is orders of magnitude cheaper
than from Earth’s surface, even though it
means moving those resources a thousand times
further.
Regardless, it is not beyond our technical
capability even now to make a remote-controlled
production chain that would involve rovers
scooping regolith into solar kilns to produce
the refined metal as bricks, sheets, rods,
or thin foils.
There’s likely to be lots of minor practical
issues in adapting anything made on Earth
to work on the Moon, but a first wave of soil
and resource surveyors would probably make
that adaptation much easier as we learn what
works in practice and what doesn’t.
Now our losses in the space programs are generally
not from day to day operations, on space or
on the moon, but the launch and transit phases.
Nonetheless a robotic presence that had either
constructed an initial habitation module or
provided most of the bulky raw materials for
assembly not only helps cut down on the risk
to astronauts once they land, but gives us
a lot more mass to add extra safety features
and redundancy or thickness of shielding to
the vehicles going there.
In an ideal scenario, when we get to Milestone
19, our Lunar Research and Development Facility,
that first outpost will already be pretty
well supplied.
Gravity is low on the Moon which means you
can pile a lot of regolith on top of something
like a thin sheet of metal supported by some
metal tubes to make essentially a large and
very sturdy tent.
Similarly, we can fly in some supplies and
equipment before the astronauts even arrive,
dropping packages of food, batteries, spare
fuel or air or water and so forth for the
drones to stack into cover in such a tent.
We can also have them clear and mat down a
landing pad free of lunar dust, so that when
astronauts arrive, they essentially just have
to get out and do some assembly of whatever
was beyond the robots’ abilities, and from
cargo that arrived in quantity before they
did.
Robots will need to play a big role in developing
the moon, fundamentally because our key long
term interest in the place is to turn it into
a mass manufacturing facility of fuel and
construction material that relies heavily
on automation, especially handy if we opt
for using nuclear power to run things, but
for now let’s turn our eyes to that first
manned outpost.
First off, location matters.
We already know the preferred spot in a general
sense, and that is near the poles.
The Moon has a day that is a month long, making
solar power difficult and part of why atomic
power sources – both reactors and radioisotope
thermal generators or RTGS are attractive.
Fortunately near the poles this is less of
an issue as we can take advantage of various
high-walled craters and the latitude to get
spots where the Sun shines most of the time.
Those same craters, down near their bottoms,
will tend to have very cold spots which might
be heavy in some valuable materials.
This is why those robot surveyors would be
handy since they can poke around and find
which if any crater is high in something like
water ice.
We discussed this more back in the spring
in our episode Crater Cities.
Of course, lava tubes are also prime candidates
for lunar cities or bases, and may contain
ice deposits inside their permanently shadowed
interiors too - and they have inherent shielding
and meteorite protection.
But what sort of research are we going to
do here in this first outpost?
One of the most tempting is radio astronomy.
There is no Dark Side of the Moon in the sense
of sunless eternal night, except down in some
of those crater bottoms, but there is a side
that is Dark to the Earth, and all of Earth’s
noise.
There are also other science projects or Lunar
Development projects better done in spots
not on the poles and we also have a lot of
interest in the Moon’s enormous lava tubes.
So while that first base is likely to be mostly
about R&D for using and colonizing the moon,
it strikes me as very likely that it would
not develop further as a science outpost so
much as a support hub for many smaller outposts.
As an example, if we have air and metal production
being done at one site, it’s very easy to
bring that air into some smaller facility
of a few researchers who just have a cache
of supplies and a modest amount of solar panels
and RTGs to power the place.
Atomic power sources are very attractive on
the Moon incidentally.
There is uranium there, plus uranium is also
very light in terms of its energy density,
compared to chemical fuels, if you needed
to bring it in from Earth.
And you don’t really need to worry about
meltdowns wrecking an area, the Moon is already
a radiation-scoured desert.
Such being the case it is a great place to
be setting up breeder reactors like those
we discussed in the Future of Fission a couple
weeks back.
It’s a very attractive place to do Nuclear
Research and what’s more, producing Plutonium-238,
which emits about 500 watts per kilogram and
has a half life of 88 years is a potential
boom market for a lot of space enterprises
since it offers a reliable and small power
supply.
Ditto Strontium-90, which is easier to produce
and has about the same power density but is
shorter lived and needs more shielding.
Shielding is obviously not an issue for stationary
objects on the Moon but adds extra mass to
moving vehicles and spacecraft.
Regardless, that first research outpost is
likely to be mostly about researching the
Moon and how to exist there, satellite and
smaller outpost focused on various research
projects may pop up but that place is the
one likely to be where we are shipping stuff
to and trying out ideas like Lunar Hydroponics
and Domes or extracting water and metals or
synthesizing fuels, and from this we would
expect our first continuously occupied Multi-purpose
Lunar Base to coalesce, Milestone 20.
Its non-commercial applications of R&D aside,
we can expect to see some commercial uses
popping up.
As an example, if we place it near a source
of volatiles – things like nitrogen, water,
carbon dioxide and so forth that we think
we might find in some of those craters for
instance – then we have a source of organic
elements for use not only on the Moon but
on those Cislunar space stations and habitats
we discussed last time, rather than having
to get them off the Earth or bring them in
from beyond the Frost Line from the Asteroid
Belt or Moons of gas giants.
There are some hurdles to this of course.
We do not know if those volatiles exist on
the Moon yet and that’s why we need those
robot surveyors.
I also mentioned earlier that it would be
nice if our robot could pre-build a base and
mentioned having them make a nice clean launch
pad for ships to land on, and Moon dust is
a real worry.
The dust is sticky and abrasive and drove
our astronauts to distraction.
It can damage equipment, and given how sharp
the particles are, may be very bad to be breathing
or touching for extended periods, and is often
considered one of the biggest hurdles and
headaches of lunar exploration and development.
On the upside, the moon is basically a big
sandbox so it’s easy to maneuver the stuff
to form shielding against radiation and meteors.
And due to the low gravity it doesn’t require
a lot of structure to hold up even meters-thick
shielding.
That dust is part of the reason why solar
power isn’t considered the greatest solution
on the Moon.
Besides it getting dark for a couple weeks
at a time, your solar panels or mirrors might
get coated in dust in short order, stirred
up by your own activity, and while you could
have a robot or person go out and sweep them
and then polish them when they get scratched,
it is another reason why nuclear is fairly
attractive on the Moon.
We also talked about some other approaches
to solar power like Thermal Wadis in the Crater
City Episode.
Another problem with this multi-purpose base
is also its big advantage.
Having many different functions gives it some
diversity for funding and operation but also
could cause funding and turf conflicts between
various divergent space goals and the government
branches or companies funding or operating
them.
This is probably even more the case if it’s
a multi-government international project,
and interestingly I would not be surprised
if the first moon base was actually a commercial
enterprise that various governments, companies,
or institutions rented facilities and time
at.
One silver lining of bureaucratic battles
over space and funding is that it might also
encourage separate satellite facilities to
form too.
We discussed such issues more in Battle for
the Moon.
It should also be noted that just because
the poles and craters interest us, we don’t
necessarily put our first base inside one.
If your main interest in them is the rim walls
for solar power and the crater bottoms for
volatiles, you might just opt to go mostly
nuclear instead of dragging solar panels from
home and operating them around the space dust
issue, and just sending out rovers and collection
teams, human or robotic, to collect volatiles
and bring them home.
After all, Aristarchus Crater[g] and Plateau,
in the northwest of the Moon’s nearside,
is also considered a very attractive site
for its geological (or selenological) features
and may reveal more about the Moon itself
and the treasures it may offer than other
locations.
In any event, after this base has been in
continuous use for a decade or so and hopefully
grown and prospered, this is where we come
to finally having reached Milestone 21, a
Permanent Lunar Settlement.
Here we might see people actually living on
the Moon – maybe even born there – and
we have to start tackling issues like building
schools and community spaces.
You get your first hospital on the Moon, your
first daycare center, first park or garden,
first lunar hotel, first bar, first restaurant,
the first Church of the Moon, the first low-gravity
basketball court and so on.
For that to be practical we need to be able
to get most resources, at least by weight,
right there on the Moon, but that’s a double
necessity anyway since all those things implied
jobs and livelihoods beyond simple research
installations and resource production for
Cislunar Space, as we looked at last time,
is essentially what is likely to drive Lunar
Development.
After you have gotten all the science done
there – which admittedly could be an ongoing
project of thousands of researchers for centuries
– you have to have a reason for development
and that’s as a supply hub.
The mass extraction and fabrication of solar
panels, shades, and mirrors may be one industrial
focus.
Another might be fuel production for moving
around cislunar space and station keeping.
Another might be huge amounts of metal plates
for building space stations and habitats.
Exporting volatiles is another, but will depend
a lot on the supply and availability of them
and we really don’t know yet.
That’s one hurdle we still need to overcome,
same we don’t really know if there are good
concentrations of ores.
We know we’ll have no shortage of aluminum
and iron and silicon of course, but not necessarily
other useful metals in a way that will be
easier than getting them off Earth, for all
the launch cost issues, or from the Asteroid
Belt a bit down the road.
And by the time we have staged up to this
level of production and occupation, we probably
have gone on to both the Asteroid Belt and
Mars.
We also do not know how humans will handle
living on the Moon.
There is gravity there and it might be enough
to stay healthy without significant treatment,
but there are many medical and psychological
unknowns still.
It is possible people won’t handle living
on the Moon for extended periods very well
and we might have to have more frequent personnel
rotations or go a lot more robotic, which
might hamper many projects.
Once you have this first big permanent base
though, or while you’re building it, hopefully
you will have picked the ideal power source
for the Moon, got it going big, and be running
all that production.
That might include fuel of course, even if
it is short on volatiles Aluminum and Oxygen
can be used as a rocket fuel, and you might
also build a mass driver or electromagnetic
coil gun for launching things into space.
The escape velocity from the Moon is just
over 2 kilometers a second, there’s no air
for friction there, so such a catapult doesn’t
need its payload to ascend above the atmosphere
like it would on Earth, since there ain’t
one, so it might be the preferred way of shooting
stuff into Cislunar space.
Or on to Mars and the Asteroid Belt, our next
two episodes, and as we’ll see there, the
ability to robotically explore those places
and pre-deliver large amounts of goods before
humans arrive, potentially launched from the
Moon and for some of it, manufactured on the
Moon too, could be a massive boon.
Getting to Mars will be no easy thing, but
in truth if you have a solid base and production
setup on the Moon, with or without the accompanying
Cislunar development, that task becomes an
order of magnitude easier while at the same
time you’ve already solved a lot of the
problems a trip to Mars will include.
There’s always some debate if we should
go to Mars first or back to the Moon again,
like most of you I would be happy either way
and I do believe it is possible to go to Mars
without this stop at the Moon, but it strikes
me as far harder and more risky.
The Moon is close, close enough for real-time
conversation with earth and only a few days
away by conventional rockets if we need to
get them help or evacuate.
We would hopefully be able to rescue people
from other bases on the Moon but if it came
down to it, one lone astronaut with a spare
air tank could potentially survive for the
few days needed to scramble a rescue mission
right from Earth orbital facilities if need
be, while experts at home can advise real
time on what they should do to survive.
That won’t be an option for Mars, so it
is best to work out a lot of the kinks on
the Moon before trying our hand there.
Those same long travel times and hardships
also encourage us to want to start from day
one on Mars with a permanent base, not a small
expedition to land, plant a flag, and get
some rock samples.
And as we’ll see next time, setting up a
base on Mars will be no easy task.
So this was the third episode of the series
and we bumped it up earlier in our schedule
because of demand from the audience not to
wait.
If you didn’t know though, it actually came
out a few days earlier over on Nebula, our
new streaming service, and all of our episodes
come out there now a bit early and ad-free.
If you’d like to catch all of SFIAs episodes
early and without ads, or see any of the great
content from our sister channels on Nebula,
you can sign up for Nebula today.
However, you can also get it for free by instead
signing up for Curiosity Stream, whose partnering
with us to bring you the best education videos
out there.
Curiosity Stream has excellent educational
content of their own and they are running
26% discount if you use the link in the description.
That’s a great deal since it means you get
a year of both Curiositystream and Nebula
for less than $15, and it helps support this
show and a lot of other educational content
which is what Curiositystream and Nebula are
all about, and again you can get a year of
both for less than $15 by using the link in
the episode’s description.
So as mentioned we are continuing our look
at Becoming an Interplanetary Species, and
in three weeks that will take us to Mars and
our first colony there.
Next week though we’ll be a bit closer to
home as we contemplate the notion of Mega-Cities,
the popular and often dystopian concept in
science fiction, and we’ll look at the challenges
and interesting scenarios for cities on the
grow.
Then on Sunday October 11th we’ll be taking
a look at the recent Navy UFO videos and analyzing
those, and in two weeks we’ll be contemplating
the notion of a Low-Tech Spacefaring culture.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you’d like to help support future
episodes, you can donate to us on Patreon,
or our website, IsaacArthur.net, which are
linked in the episode description below, along
with all of our various social media forums
where you can get updates and chat with others
about the concepts in the episodes and many
other futuristic ideas.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!